In this lesson,

we're going to discuss wired network topologies.

Now, a network topology refers to the arrangement

of different elements like the links, nodes, clients,

and servers that make up a computer network.

It is crucial that you understand

the different types of network topologies

when you attempt to design an efficient

and resilient network infrastructure.

Now, before we cover the six different types

of network topologies that we can use,

we first need to understand

how these topologies are going to be documented

in our network diagrams.

Generally, you're going to find

that network diagrams are going to document our topologies

using either a physical topology

or a logical topology.

Now, a physical topology is used to show

how the network devices and components

are physically cabled and connected together

using various types of copper or fiber media.

For example, if I wanted to show

where all the different network computers, routers,

and switches are located

inside of my office building,

I could get a copy of the building's floor plan

and then document where each of those devices

and those cables are located in that building

by drawing it over the floor plan for the office.

On the other hand,

we can also document our network

using a logical topology.

When we talk about logical topologies,

we're really talking about

how the traffic is actually

going to flow through our network.

On a logical diagram,

you're going to see where the workstations are,

where the routers are,

where the switches are,

and how all that stuff is going to be connected.

But this diagram doesn't actually show

the location of each device in the real world

by displaying it on top of a floor plan.

For example, just because a server is shown

in the upper right-hand corner of a logical diagram

doesn't mean this locate

in the upper-right hand corner

of your office building.

Instead, you may have several devices

that are shown on the logical diagram

that are located within the same room

or on different floors

or even in different buildings.

And it really doesn't matter

when you're dealing with a logical topology

because we just want to know

how they're connected logically in the network

and how the data is going to flow.

Within a logical topology,

I'm really just concerned with the way

that the data is flowing in the network

and not the way it's actually cabled

in the physical or real-world environment.

For right now, it's not really important

that you can understand or read these diagrams

or it's associated symbols and icons.

But instead, I just want you to realize

that there is a difference

between a logical and a physical topology,

and the difference is the one

is being focused on the logical

or network flow of the data,

while the other one is focused

on the physical layout of the cabling

and the devices in your real-world environments.

Now, I mentioned there are six different topologies

that we're going to cover in this lesson,

so let's take a look at point-to-point,

ring, bus, star, hub-and-spoke,

and mesh apologies as we continue on.

First, we have point-to-point topologies.

Now a point-to-point topology

is the simplest form of a network topology

because it involves a direct connection between two devices.

Point-to-point topologies are often going to be used

for connecting a computer to a network peripheral,

like a printer or a scanner.

While this is a straightforward

and reliable method for creating small-scale connections,

it's not really going to be scalable

for our larger networks.

Now, the only exception

to point-to-point topologies being used

in large enterprise-scale networks

is really for your wide-area network or WAN connections,

because you can connect

one of your company's remote offices in California

all the way back to your headquarters office in New York

using a point-to-point fiber optic connection

between those two facilities.

Second, we have ring topologies.

Now, a ring topology is a network configuration

where each device is connected to two other devices,

and this forms a circular data path.

In this setup, data is going to travel in one direction,

either clockwise or counterclockwise

until it reaches its destination.

Now, one of the benefits of using ring topologies

is that it's going to prevent data collisions

due to using this unidirectional flow.

However, if one node fails in the ring,

it can disrupt the entire network

unless there are redundant connections for failover.

Now, these days, ring networks are not very common

unless you're going to be using

a Fiber Distributed Data Interface

known as an FDDI or FDDI connection.

Now, a FDDI connection is going to be used

to conduct data transmissions

on fiber optic lines

in a local area network

and can actually extend up to

a range of about 200 kilometers,

which is about 125 miles in range.

Now, a FDDI ring is going to operate

on a dual ring structure,

and this provides redundancy

with a primary and secondary ring.

If the primary ring fails for some reason,

that secondary ring can maintain network operations for you.

FDDI is really well known for high bandwidth,

and this makes it really suitable

for environments with large data transfers

and high reliability requirements

such as campus area networks or data centers.

Third, we have bus topologies.

Now, in a bus topology,

all the network devices are going to be connected

back to a single central cable,

which is known as the backbone or the bus.

Data can be sent by any device

and it's going to be available

to every other device on that bus

but only the intended recipient,

which is identified by a unique address,

will actually process the message that it's seeing.

While bus topologies are really easy to install

and they require less cable than other layouts,

they do have some significant limitations.

The entire network can be disabled

if that main cable fails,

and as more devices are added,

the performance of that whole network will decrease

due to more data collisions happening on that cable.

Similar to a ring network,

bus networks are considered

to be an older technology,

and they're not commonly used

in our modern home office

or small office environments.

Fourth, we have the star topology.

Now, the star topology

is one of the most common network layouts

that's in use today,

and your own home network

is most likely using a star topology right now.

In a star topology,

each node in the network

is going to be connected

back to a centralized connection point,

which is normally going to be a network switch.

That switch can also act as a repeater

for your network's data flow.

This type of star configuration

is considered to be very robust

because the failure of one link

doesn't affect any of the other links.

However, the entire network

does depend on the functioning

of that centralized connection point,

that network switch that we just talked about.

So if that switch fails,

your entire network will become inoperable

if you're using a star topology.

Now, fifth, we have a hub-and-spoke topology.

Now, the hub-and-spoke topology

is a variation of the star topology

where the centralized node,

which we're going to call a hub in this case,

is connected to multiple nodes,

which we call spokes.

These spokes are not directly connected to each other,

so they must transmit their data to one of the hubs

before that data is going to be forwarded to another hub

and then onward to the final destination node in that spoke.

This layout is commonly used in airlines

as well as in telecommunication networks.

For example, if I wanted to take a flight

from Orlando, Florida, over to Honolulu, Hawaii,

I probably am not going to be able to find

a direct point-to-point or nonstop flight.

Instead, I may choose to fly on Delta,

which will then fly me

from Orlando over to Atlanta,

which is one of their hub cities,

and then I'll switch planes.

I'll get on that plane

and fly to Los Angeles,

which is another one of Delta's hub cities.

And then from there,

I'll switch onto another plane

and I'll take that plane

from Los Angeles over to Hawaii.

Now, if I instead decide to fly with American Airlines,

they use a different set of hubs

for their hub-and-spoke model.

So I might go from Orlando

over to the American Airlines' Dallas-Fort Worth hub,

and then switch planes in Dallas

and board a long flight

all the way out to Hawaii from Texas.

In either case, because we're operating

under this hub-and-spoke model,

the other passengers can be flying in

from all of the other cities

around the U.S. to that hub,

and then we'll all get on the plane together

and go from that hub over to Hawaii.

This is exactly what happens

in the hub-and-spoke model

when we're dealing with our networks as well.

Now, this means that we're going to be able to consolidate

a lot of our smaller regional offices

in one region like the Northeast

over to a hub, maybe in New York City,

and that way I could take the data

from the New York City office

and send it all the way over

to our Los Angeles office,

which is another hub,

and then from there,

it would spread out to the other

regional offices in California.

By doing this,

we can have these two larger data centers

having a really big, high, fast,

high bandwidth connection

that can transfer all the data for us very quickly

from those smaller regional offices

all the way across the country.

And this can save us a lot of money

by not having to connect

every one of those smaller offices

to each of the other smaller offices

all over the country

because those long distance links get really expensive.

Sixth, and finally, we have the mesh topology.

Now, the mesh topology is going to feature

a point-to-point connection

between every single device on the network

to create a robust and redundant network.

Now, there are two types of mesh topologies

you need to consider.

A full-mesh and a partial-mesh.

Now, a full-mesh topology is one

where every node is connected

to every other node in the network.

This topology provides high redundancy,

but it can be very expensive

and complex to install

because of the number of cables and ports required.

For example, if I have three nodes I need to connect,

I can create this full-mesh

by cabling node one and node two together,

then I cable node two and node three together,

and then I cable node one

and node three together.

This means, for three nodes,

I only need three cables.

That's not so bad.

But if I simply double the number of nodes

from three to six,

I'm actually not going to double

the number of cables required.

Instead, if I have six nodes,

I'm actually going to need 15 connections to ensure

that every node can communicate directly

with every other node.

This is because the number of connections we require

is going to be represented by the formula,

n times n minus one divided by two,

where n is the number of nodes.

So if I have three nodes,

it's three times three minus one divided by two.

This would equal three times two divided by two,

or three.

Now, if I have six nodes, on the other hand,

I'm going to have six times six minus one divided by two.

This would give me six times five divided by two,

which then turns into 30 divided by two,

or 15 different cables.

You can see how impractical this can be

when you start having a network

with a large number of nodes.

So to get the benefits of a mesh network

without having to create a full-mesh network,

we can opt to use what is called

a partial-mesh topology for our networks.

Now, a partial-mesh topology

is a less interlinked version

where some nodes are organized

in a full-mesh scheme

while others are only connected to one

or two devices inside of the network.

So if I have six nodes,

I may decide that only three of those nodes

are my most critical ones,

and they're going to be the ones

that are fully-interconnected in a mesh topology,

while the other three are considered less important nodes,

and they may only connect back to one

or two of those critical nodes

to send their data

between all the different nodes

in that partial-mesh.

So remember, understanding the different types

of wired network topologies is crucial

for network design and management.

Each topology has its

unique advantages and disadvantages

that makes them suitable for various scenarios.

Point-to-point is considered to be simple

and reliable for small-scale connections,

but it's not practical

for larger enterprise networks

most of the time.

Ring and bus topologies will offer simplicity,

but they can be vulnerable

to single points of failure

because you can have the ring cut

or the bus cut,

and that will stop all the communication on that topology.

Star and hub-and-spoke topologies do a good job

of giving you centralized network management,

but they do rely heavily

on the functioning of that central point,

which we call the hub in the hub and spoke,

or the switch inside of our star topologies.

And lastly, the mesh topology

offers robustness and redundancy,

but it can be complex

and costly to implement

because when you're doing a full-mesh,

you have a lot of connections

between all of those nodes.

In a partial-mesh, you're giving up

some of that resiliency and redundancy

in terms of lower cost and higher scale.
